Younger old, we need to consider the topic of thinking ability and how to develop it effectively.
All of us can think. We can think about a lot of things. Some good and some bad.
It's not uncommon, even for an adult, to let his mind wander aimlessly.
Or a person may spend time thinking of frivolous matters of little substance.
That's what can happen to our thinking. But it doesn't always have a positive effect on our life or our future.
Though specifically addressed to a young man, the Bible book of Proverbs gives sound advice for all of us.
Proverbs chapter 1 verse 4 says to give a young man, for that matter any of us, knowledge and thinking ability.
What is thinking ability in this verse?
The Hebrew word translated thinking ability can be used in a bad sense or in a favorable one.
So our mind and thoughts can be directed to a worthy, upright end, or just the opposite.
If we incline our thinking to aspects of Jehovah's will and purposes, we'll safeguard our own thinking ability, directing it into the right channels.
How valuable is that type of thinking process?
Turn to Proverbs chapter 3 verses 21 and 22, which states,
safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability. They will give you life.
Thinking ability is not in the exclusive realm of the studious type.
Throughout our entire life, we take an information by reading, seeing, hearing and experiencing things.
And it's the way we take in information and react to it that shapes our individual behavior and personality.
Many persons have not used their minds for much more than the essentials of daily living.
But to succeed in life and in Jehovah's eyes, it's necessary that we learn to train, develop and guard thinking ability.
Consider how trained thinking ability might protect us when it comes to using the internet wisely.
While the internet can be an excellent tool for gathering knowledge, thinking ability, when properly exercised, will safeguard us from its harmful effects.
For example, some popular social media sites contain short videos designed to deliver instant gratification.
If the viewer gets no immediate emotional reward, he is tempted to keep scrolling to find material that will give the desired effect.
Now over time, this can lower one's attention span, which may impede a person's ability to learn, retain and recall information.
None of us would want that to happen to us, would we?
Additionally, studies have shown that those who spend too much of their time with their electronic devices are more prone to stress, anxiety, depression or other mental health problems.
On the other hand, thinking ability can help us to work out ways to control our use of such technology.
For example, God oriented thinking ability can help us to distinguish truth from misleading and false information.
Thus there is wisdom in what is stated in Proverbs chapter 2 verses 11 and 12.
Thinking ability will keep watch over you and discernment will safeguard you to save you from the bad course.
Why is this so important?
Well, thinking ability and discernment gives us perception and perception is closely related to our conscience.
What we have meditated on from God's Word and stored in our mind can mold our conscience, which is an inner mechanism to warn us of wrong actions or tendencies.
In effect, our thinking watches over us.
Now notice how this is alluded to at Hebrews chapter 5 and verse 14.
Solid food belongs to mature people. To those who through use have their powers of discernment, that is their thinking, trained to distinguish both right and wrong.
All of us, both young and old, should think carefully about the following suggestions.
Firstly, grow in knowledge of Jehovah.
Proverbs 9 verse 10 says in part, knowledge of the most holy one is understanding.
Coming to know Jehovah is a blessing and a protection.
We need to pray to Jehovah for insight when we study, apply ourselves to Bible reading on a regular basis and immerse ourselves in the truth.
We should talk to Jehovah in prayer as our closest confident.
This means using our thinking ability to convince ourselves that Jehovah's advice is the best advice.
Because doing so will safeguard us when we're tempted, tested, or put into a situation where we know we must say no.
Remember who we are, what we stand for, and to whom we have dedicated our life.
Next suggestion, we need to continue to enhance our Christian personality.
This is important, but why?
Because people who love Jehovah will like and respect us for who we are.
And what kind of personality are we suggesting?
Did you note the expression Christian personality?
That means Christ-like.
We cannot go wrong by imitating Jesus in any way possible.
Recall that 1 Peter 2 verse 21 says,
To this course you were called because even Christ suffered for you, leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely.
Jesus' whole way of life, his attitudes, his values, his interactions with others, culminated into a personality that we should strive to follow closely.
We know well how we want to look when dressed for a special occasion.
We cloth ourselves with careful attention to details.
Colossians 3 verse 10 picks up on the illustration of clothing.
There it states,
and cloth yourselves with the new personality.
Similarly, Romans 13 verse 14 tells us,
Put on the Lord Jesus Christ and do not be planning ahead for the desires of the flesh.
We have to think about Jesus' personality constantly.
It certainly does not come naturally to us in perfect descendants of Adam.
It takes real thinking ability.
Remember, in this case, we are not clothing ourselves just for one special occasion.
This is to be our daily wardrobe.
To the extent possible, with our imperfection, we continuously work to reflect Jesus' personality.
Next suggestion.
Give priority to our priorities.
What does this mean?
To accomplish things in life, we must have schedules, routines and priorities.
For instance, at Bethel, much work is accomplished because of the daily routine
and because of giving priority to spiritual matters.
At Philippians 1 verse 10, Paul said to make sure of the more important things.
All some thinking ability will help us to see the value of organizing our life each day
to give priority to the most important things.
Next suggestion.
Keep a modest view of our own knowledge and experience.
Thinking ability will help us to filter the information we let into our mind.
The real test of whether our thinking ability has been properly trained
is how we apply knowledge.
So we need to be cautious in life.
Ask questions, fact check, get advice, read, study and learn from Bible principles.
And once we've accumulated knowledge, insight and thinking ability,
modesty is involved in how we share it.
The Apostle Paul said at Romans 12 verse 3,
I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think,
but to think so as to have a sound mind.
Yes, we need to display a modest outlook on our acquired thinking ability.
Did you notice it said to think with a sound mind?
Not an inflated mind, not thinking more of ourselves than is necessary to think.
Another way to use thinking ability in this old world is to avoid debt.
Now why is this our last point?
Because material things are not the most important things in life.
Many work themselves to death to gain material prosperity.
However, as Christians, there's other work that's related to worship.
We want to work ourselves to life.
Yes, focused on everlasting life, yet ahead.
It's true though that some money is needed to buy the necessities of life.
Whether we're young and just starting to earn a living,
or we're older and have been working secularly for years,
we need to learn to manage and budget money.
This involves using our thinking ability to separate needs from wants
and being cautious about accumulating much debt.
Remember, according to Proverbs 22 verse 7,
the borrower is a slave to the lender.
These few suggestions are but a sample of areas in life
where we need thinking ability and discernment
in order to analyze our situation, make decisions, and determine future plans.
Always remember the advice of Proverbs 3, 21 and 22.
Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability.
They will give you life.
Yes, and we may add, even everlasting life in God's righteous new world.